---
title: "Node People vs. Edge People"
published_at: 2024-02-13
---

Over the course of my study and career, I've come to realize that people largely
fall into one of two groups of thinkers - they're either node people or edge
people. With most dichotomies, there is usually a huge amount of grey area. This
is one of the rare cases where I've found that people fall pretty fully into one
category or the other.

# Node People

Node people live in the world of facts, figures, quantifiables, and
spreadsheets. They can cite dates for historical events. It is easy for them to
memorize method names from new programming languages or libraries. It's easy for
them to recall algorithms from memory in interviews. They might ask how your
spouse and kids are by name when talking with you because they can easily
memorize this information. They got good grades in school and probably went to a
respectable college. Node people have formidable intelligence - the best of them
have minds like steel traps.

Our society's definition of intelligence is synonymous with "highly developed
node person". The entirety of our society is organized toward the fostering and
development of good node people. Standardized test scores are scored on the
level of node-knowledge one can recite.

Node-knowledge is rewarded straightforwardly in the workforce, however, there
are more node-people than edge-people which creates an oversupply of node
people. Node people seem to universally make a respectable income within their
industry, with those who are exceptionally talented becoming subject matter
experts in extremely narrow domains where they have the opportunity to create
new knowledge. Due to the higher number of node people, these roles are
incredibly competitive.

# Edge People

Edge people go by feel. Despite potentially having a broad knowledge of
subjects, they may have difficulty recalling the concrete facts of the subjects
they are familiar with. Chronology may be important to them but the dates are
usually unremarkable. They may have a strong connection with art and maybe even
make their own. The best of them are like spiders sitting on a broad web. It is
as if their sensory system extends out into the world. They don't see but
instead, feel how things that seem extremely disparate are intimately connected.

Our society doesn't hate edge people, it just pretends they don't exist because
they are hard to quantify. Since it's hard to "measure" edge people's knowledge
against existing yardsticks such as standardized testing, grades, et al., their
worth is typically assessed by how their previous "bets" have played out. The
lack of recognition for early-career accomplishments in edge people leads many
of them to become discouraged or otherwise disillusioned with society. The only
way out of the trap is for them to pretend they are node people, knowing that
they will never compete in that domain at the same level or stay true to their
way of thinking for long enough to build up a corpus of "wins" so that their
approach is unquestionable.

Edge-knowledge in the workforce is either highly rewarded or severely punished.
Edge people seem to mostly become either the hippie/conspiracy theorist
"everything is connected man" type or they leverage their creativity to drive
innovation. There is very little middle ground between the two extremes.

# Working Together

There are many roads to Rome. Node people and edge people have very different
ways of being and growing in society each with their pros and cons. In software
development, it takes both types to build incredible things. One of the reasons
the software industry is so interesting is that at various points throughout
history, it seems to have had equal numbers of both node and edge people.
Although, we seem to be in an era where edge people are being marginalized.

The issue I see across the software industry is that once the node people take
over, hiring is optimized for node people. The industry has been led to believe
by Silicon Valley that we must scale _quickly_. To scale quickly, convenient
heuristics need to be put into place that make the hiring process faster. Sadly,
most of these heuristics ignore the existence of edge people leading to massive
corporations full of node people and edge people badly pretending to be node
people.

I'll reiterate - node people are essential. They are the stability of an
organization. They maintain processes and a sense of normalcy. A business
without any node people is a garage band playing for beer money. On the other
hand, a business without any edge people is a beige, conformist megacorp that
never innovates or creates anything truly new. Meta is a great example of the
former unfortunately becoming the latter.

Once you have a good equal-ish mix of node and edge people the results are
incredible, although it can be time-consuming to create the conditions necessary
to get the node and edge people talking to each other. Throughout my career,
I've seen edge and node people butt heads countless times. Typically the nodes
think that the edges are wasting time and the edges think that the nodes are
trying to control them. The toughest thing is that sometimes one of them is
correct in their assessment. If the manager has a good sense of where to keep
the dial between "innovate" and "deliver" then all it takes is a bit of
occasional nudging one way or the other to keep on course.

A product that is innovative and reliable is greater than the sum of its parts.
It transcends the category and is a new thing entirely. Keep balancing the
numbers between node and edge people, gently keep the ship on course, and the
product will be forged out of the healthy tension between two different ways of
doing things.
