For my NYE reflection this year I want to clarify an idea that is about ready to
come forth in the tech world: **The Good Internet**.

The Good Internet was only around for a little while in the late 90s, sometime
around the decline of BBSes, the uptick in popularity of GeoCities, and
certainly before the wide adoption of Myspace (the beginning of the end).

## The Bad Internet

What we have now is The Bad Internet. Although the internet began to deteriorate
in quality as social media became more popular, the mass adoption of smartphones
was the final nail in the coffin (specifically upon the release of the iPhone).
What social media, smartphones, broadband internet, Web 2.0 and other similar
trends accomplished was it made the internet not only usable for but
specifically designed for the lowest common denominator users.

The LCD user doesn't know how to program. They prefer Apple products because
they "just work". They don't understand what the internet is beyond the
surface-level of webpages and "apps". There is nothing inherently wrong with LCD
users and this piece is not an indictment of them. The problem is that LCD users
are considered the de-facto end-users for most consumer electronics and
mass-distributed software.

The focus of computer-based innovation is now solely geared toward increasing
user adoption. To increase user adoption across the widest segment of potential
users, you target the lowest common denominator factors. This process played out
long enough has had the unintended side-effect of creating tools that are
extremely limiting for technologically capable users.

## What Does a Good Tool Look Like

I don't do much coding at work anymore as a manager but I am constantly hacking
away on side projects late into the night. I don't consider myself a great
programmer but I do have a keen eye for picking a useful tool that will help me
build out my idea in the fastest way possible. I regard this skill to be almost
as good as being a "great" programmer. I regularly see great programmers
acquiesce to the siren song of dogmatism instead of choosing the right tools.

The right tool is the one that will help you maximize the good stuff and
minimize the bad stuff. Most of the time the "good stuff" you're looking for is
building the project in the shortest amount of time possible although sometimes
it's building a project in the most fun or interesting way possible. "Bad stuff"
to minimize is almost always bugs.

If we consider the internet, the one that you're probably reading this essay on,
i.e. the internet of social media and graphical UI-driven websites, as a tool,
what could we infer about what it maximizes and minimizes? The modern internet
maximizes high-frequency consumption of trivial information, salaciousness
(pornography, online dating, et al.), selling things/advertising, and interfaces
easy to use with thumbs to name just a few. It minimizes depth and nuance of
material (red or blue thinking only), genuine creativity - which almost always
comes out of mischievousness which is frowned upon in the modern web, and
virtuosity.

## N.B. Interesting End Users

There are a lot of interesting end-users out there to design for apart from
technologists. Specialty cases. People with subject-matter knowledge in highly
complex fields outside of tech. Building tools in this arena is **highly
engaging** work. It's just not what this essay focuses on.

## Building Good Things Again

My mind is at ease because I see a whole generation of new programmers that are
skeptical of "shiny new tech". I sense that even if they can't consciously
articulate it, most Gen Z programmers have a feeling when using most of the
technology built by Millenials and Gen X that even though everything is faster,
higher resolution, brighter, and higher fidelity, there's something soulless and
rotten at its core.

More and more technologists are starting to tug at that thread. It seems every
month I'm seeing more command line interfaces released, an increased interest in
how computers work closer to the metal (networking, OS design, etc.), and a
frankness and honestness in some designs that I haven't seen for decades now.

If any of this resonates with you, take up the crusade with me and build your
heart and soul into the technology you create. Ask the right questions - not the
boring ones. Assume that some existing piece of software is mostly bs and hype
(because it probably is) and write your own program that solves the problem in a
more honest way - one that focuses on solving the problem well instead of
generating ad revenue. Most importantly - always hack on side projects, it's the
only way you can truly keep in touch with your authentic creative self in
programming.

If everything else fails, look back to The Good Internet for inspiration.
There's a multitude of interesting types of software that eventually morphed
into incredibly boring takes on the initial spark of interestingness. I will
leave you with some ideas that the world could use more of right now that are
worth exploring or perhaps creating your own version of.

- BBS
- IRC (still around, use it, get a sense for social command line-driven
  interaction)
- IRC bots (now Telegram, Discord, etc. The text-limitation created something
  special.)
- Blog Rings
- Encoding/decoding data as audio (dial-up internet)
- Commandline Interfaces
- TUIs
- Bespoke hardware interfaces
